.. _parameters:

================================================================================
Parameters
================================================================================

:Date: 01/28/2016

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 3
   :backlinks: none


This document attempts to describe a variety of the PROJ.4 parameters which can
be applied to all, or many coordinate system definitions.  This document does
not attempt to describe the parameters particular to particular projection
types.  Some of these can be found in the GeoTIFF `Projections Transform List
<http://www.remotesensing.org/geotiff/proj_list/>`__.  The definitive
documentation for most parameters is Gerald's original documentation available
from the main PROJ.4 page.

Parameter list
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Common parameters:

(this PROJ.4 distribution including `cs2cs` and datum support)

::

    +a         Semimajor radius of the ellipsoid axis
    +alpha     ? Used with Oblique Mercator and possibly a few others
    +axis      Axis orientation (new in 4.8.0)
    +b         Semiminor radius of the ellipsoid axis
    +datum     Datum name (see `proj -ld`)
    +ellps     Ellipsoid name (see `proj -le`)
    +k         Scaling factor (old name)
    +k_0       Scaling factor (new name)
    +lat_0     Latitude of origin
    +lat_1     Latitude of first standard parallel
    +lat_2     Latitude of second standard parallel
    +lat_ts    Latitude of true scale
    +lon_0     Central meridian
    +lonc      ? Longitude used with Oblique Mercator and possibly a few others
    +lon_wrap  Center longitude to use for wrapping (see below)
    +nadgrids  Filename of NTv2 grid file to use for datum transforms (see below)
    +no_defs   Don't use the /usr/share/proj/proj_def.dat defaults file
    +over      Allow longitude output outside -180 to 180 range, disables wrapping (see below)
    +pm        Alternate prime meridian (typically a city name, see below)
    +proj      Projection name (see `proj -l`)
    +south     Denotes southern hemisphere UTM zone
    +to_meter  Multiplier to convert map units to 1.0m
    +towgs84   3 or 7 term datum transform parameters (see below)
    +units     meters, US survey feet, etc.
    +vto_meter vertical conversion to meters.
    +vunits    vertical units.
    +x_0       False easting
    +y_0       False northing
    +zone      UTM zone

Extended list provided by Gerald Evenden "grepped out of the RCS directory".

(libproj4 by G.E.; no datum support)

::

    +a         Semimajor radius of the ellipsoid axis
    +alpha     ? Used with Oblique Mercator and possibly a few others
    +azi
    +b         Semiminor radius of the ellipsoid axis
    +belgium
    +beta
    +czech
    +e         Eccentricity of the ellipsoid = sqrt(1 - b^2/a^2) = sqrt( f*(2-f) )
    +ellps     Ellipsoid name (see `proj -le`)
    +es        Eccentricity of the ellipsoid squared
    +f         Flattening of the ellipsoid = 1-sqrt(1-e^2) (often presented as an inverse, e.g. 1/298)
    +geoc
    +guam
    +h
    +k         Scaling factor (old name)
    +K
    +k_0       Scaling factor (new name)
    +lat_0     Latitude of origin
    +lat_1     Latitude of first standard parallel
    +lat_2     Latitude of second standard parallel
    +lat_b
    +lat_t
    +lat_ts    Latitude of true scale
    +lon_0     Central meridian
    +lon_1
    +lon_2
    +lonc      ? Longitude used with Oblique Mercator and possibly a few others
    +lsat
    +m
    +M
    +n
    +no_cut
    +no_off    No offset. If present, do not offset origin to center of projection. Only used in Oblique Mercator projection.
    +no_uoff   Backwards compatible version of +no_off.
    +no_rot
    +ns
    +o_alpha
    +o_lat_1
    +o_lat_2
    +o_lat_c
    +o_lat_p
    +o_lon_1
    +o_lon_2
    +o_lon_c
    +o_lon_p
    +o_proj
    +over
    +p
    +path
    +proj      Projection name (see `proj -l`)
    +q
    +R
    +R_a
    +R_A       Compute radius such that the area of the sphere is the same as the area of the ellipsoid
    +rf        Reciprocal of the ellipsoid flattening term (e.g. 298)
    +R_g
    +R_h
    +R_lat_a
    +R_lat_g
    +rot
    +R_V
    +s
    +south     Denotes southern hemisphere UTM zone
    +sym
    +t
    +theta
    +tilt
    +to_meter  Multiplier to convert map units to 1.0m
    +units     meters, US survey feet, etc.
    +vopt
    +W
    +westo
    +x_0       False easting
    +y_0       False northing
    +zone      UTM zone

See GE's `libproj4
manual <http://members.verizon.net/~gerald.evenden/proj4/manual.pdf>`__ for
further details (`copy in wayback machine <http://web.archive.org/web/20080807155507/http://members.verizon.net/~gerald.evenden/proj4/manual.pdf>`__).

Further details for projection at http://www.remotesensing.org/geotiff/proj_list/

Units
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Horizontal units can be specified using the +units= keyword with a symbolic
name for a unit (ie. us-ft).  Alternatively the translation to meters can be
specified with the +to_meter keyword (ie. 0.304800609601219 for US feet).  The
``-lu`` argument to cs2cs or proj can be used to list symbolic unit names.
The default unit for projected coordinates is the meter.
A few special projections deviate from this behaviour, most notably the
latlong pseudo-projection that returns degrees.


Vertical Units
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vertical (Z) units can be specified using the ``+vunits=`` keyword with a
symbolic name for a unit (ie. ``us-ft``).  Alternatively the translation to
meters can be specified with the ``+vto_meter`` keyword (ie. 0.304800609601219
for US feet).  The ``-lu`` argument to cs2cs or proj can be used to list symbolic
unit names.  If no vertical units are specified, the vertical units will
default to be the same as the horizontal coordinates.

Note that vertical unit transformations are only supported in pj_transform()
and programs built on that such as cs2cs.  The low level projections functions
pj_fwd() and pj_inv() and programs using them directly such as proj do not
handle vertical units at all.

False Easting/Northing
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Virtually all coordinate systems allow for the presence of a false easting
(``+x_0``) and northing (``+y_0``).  Note that these values are always expressed in
meters even if the coordinate system is some other units.  Some coordinate
systems (such as UTM) have implicit false easting and northing values.

lon_wrap, over - Longitude Wrapping
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

By default PROJ.4 wraps output longitudes in the range -180 to 180.  The +over
switch can be used to disable the default wrapping which is done at a low level
- in ``pj_inv()``.  This is particularly useful with projections like eqc where
it would desirable for X values past -20000000 (roughly) to continue past
-180 instead of wrapping to +180.

The ``+lon_wrap`` option can be used to provide an alternative means of doing
longitude wrapping within ``pj_transform()``.  The argument to this option is a
center longitude.  So ``+lon_wrap=180`` means wrap longitudes in the range 0 to
360.  Note that ``+over`` does **not** disable ``+lon_wrap``.

pm - Prime Meridian
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A prime meridian may be declared indicating the offset between the prime
meridian of the declared coordinate system and that of greenwich.  A prime
meridian is clared using the "pm" parameter, and may be assigned a symbolic
name, or the longitude of the alternative prime meridian relative to greenwich.

Currently prime meridian declarations are only utilized by the
``pj_transform()`` API call, not the ``pj_inv()`` and ``pj_fwd()`` calls.
Consequently the user utility ``cs2cs`` does honour prime meridians but the
proj user utility ignores them.

The following predeclared prime meridian names are supported.  These can be
listed using the cs2cs argument -lm.

::

   greenwich 0dE
      lisbon 9d07'54.862"W
       paris 2d20'14.025"E
      bogota 74d04'51.3"E
      madrid 3d41'16.48"W
        rome 12d27'8.4"E
        bern 7d26'22.5"E
     jakarta 106d48'27.79"E
       ferro 17d40'W
    brussels 4d22'4.71"E
   stockholm 18d3'29.8"E
      athens 23d42'58.815"E
        oslo 10d43'22.5"E

Example of use.  The location ``long=0``, ``lat=0`` in the greenwich based lat/long
coordinates is translated to lat/long coordinates with Madrid as the prime
meridian.

::

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +datum=WGS84 +to +proj=latlong +datum=WGS84 +pm=madrid
    0 0                           <i>(input)</i>
    3d41'16.48"E    0dN 0.000     <i>(output)</i>

towgs84 - Datum transformation to WGS84
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Datum shifts can be approximated by 3 parameter spatial translations (in
geocentric space), or 7 parameter shifts (translation + rotation + scaling).
The parameters to describe this can be described using the towgs84 parameter.

In the three parameter case, the three arguments are the translations to the
geocentric location in meters.

For instance, the following demonstrates converting from the Greek GGRS87 datum
to WGS84.

::

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=GRS80 +towgs84=-199.87,74.79,246.62
        +to +proj=latlong +datum=WGS84
    20 35
    20d0'5.467"E    35d0'9.575"N 8.570

The EPSG database provides this example for transforming from WGS72 to WGS84
using an approximated 7 parameter transformation.

::

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=WGS72 +towgs84=0,0,4.5,0,0,0.554,0.219 \
        +to +proj=latlong +datum=WGS84
    4 55
    4d0'0.554"E     55d0'0.09"N 3.223

The seven parameter case uses ``delta_x``, ``delta_y``, ``delta_z``, ``Rx -
rotation X``, ``Ry - rotation Y``, ``Rz - rotation Z``, ``M_BF - Scaling``.
The three translation parameters are in meters as in the three parameter case.
The rotational parameters are in seconds of arc.  The scaling is apparently the
scale change in parts per million.

A more complete discussion of the 3 and 7 parameter transformations can be
found in the EPSG database (trf_method's 9603 and 9606).  Within PROJ.4 the
following calculations are used to apply the ``towgs84`` transformation (going
to WGS84).  The x, y and z coordinates are in geocentric coordinates.

Three parameter transformation (simple offsets):

::

  x[io] = x[io] + defn->datum_params[0];
  y[io] = y[io] + defn->datum_params[1];
  z[io] = z[io] + defn->datum_params[2];

Seven parameter transformation (translation, rotation and scaling):

::

    #define Dx_BF (defn->datum_params[0])
    #define Dy_BF (defn->datum_params[1])
    #define Dz_BF (defn->datum_params[2])
    #define Rx_BF (defn->datum_params[3])
    #define Ry_BF (defn->datum_params[4])
    #define Rz_BF (defn->datum_params[5])
    #define M_BF  (defn->datum_params[6])

    x_out = M_BF*(       x[io] - Rz_BF*y[io] + Ry_BF*z[io]) + Dx_BF;
    y_out = M_BF*( Rz_BF*x[io] +       y[io] - Rx_BF*z[io]) + Dy_BF;
    z_out = M_BF*(-Ry_BF*x[io] + Rx_BF*y[io] +       z[io]) + Dz_BF;

Note that EPSG method 9607 (coordinate frame rotation) coefficients can be
converted to EPSG method 9606 (position vector 7-parameter) supported by PROJ.4
by reversing the sign of the rotation vectors.  The methods are otherwise the
same.

nadgrids - Grid Based Datum Adjustments
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In many places (notably North America and Austrialia) national geodetic
organizations provide grid shift files for converting between different datums,
such as NAD27 to NAD83.  These grid shift files include a shift to be applied
at each grid location. Actually grid shifts are normally computed based on an
interpolation between the containing four grid points.

PROJ.4 currently supports use of grid shift files for shifting between datums
and WGS84 under some circumstances.  The grid shift table formats are ctable
(the binary format produced by the PROJ.4 ``nad2bin`` program), NTv1 (the old
Canadian format), and NTv2 (``.gsb`` - the new Canadian and Australian format).

Use of grid shifts is specified using the ``nadgrids`` keyword in a coordinate
system definition.  For example:


::

    % cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=clrk66 +nadgrids=ntv1_can.dat \
        +to +proj=latlong +ellps=GRS80 +datum=NAD83 << EOF
    -111 50
    EOF
    111d0'2.952"W   50d0'0.111"N 0.000

In this case the ``/usr/local/share/proj/ntv1_can.dat`` grid shift file was
loaded, and used to get a grid shift value for the selected point.

It is possible to list multiple grid shift files, in which case each will be
tried in turn till one is found that contains the point being transformed.

::

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=clrk66 \
              +nadgrids=conus,alaska,hawaii,stgeorge,stlrnc,stpaul \
        +to +proj=latlong +ellps=GRS80 +datum=NAD83 << EOF
    -111 44
    EOF
    111d0'2.788"W   43d59'59.725"N 0.000

Skipping Missing Grids
................................................................................

The special prefix ``@`` may be prefixed to a grid to make it optional.  If it
not found, the search will continue to the next grid.  Normally any grid not
found will cause an error.  For instance, the following would use the
``ntv2_0.gsb`` file if available (see [[NonFreeGrids]]), otherwise it would
fallback to using the ``ntv1_can.dat`` file.

::

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=clrk66 +nadgrids=@ntv2_0.gsb,ntv1_can.dat \
        +to +proj=latlong +ellps=GRS80 +datum=NAD83 << EOF
    -111 50
    EOF
    111d0'3.006"W   50d0'0.103"N 0.000

The null Grid
................................................................................

A special ``null`` grid shift file is shift with releases after 4.4.6 (not
inclusive).  This file provides a zero shift for the whole world.  It may be
listed at the end of a nadgrids file list if you want a zero shift to be
applied to points outside the valid region of all the other grids.  Normally if
no grid is found that contains the point to be transformed an error will occur.

::

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=clrk66 +nadgrids=conus,null \
        +to +proj=latlong +ellps=GRS80 +datum=NAD83 << EOF
    -111 45
    EOF
    111d0'3.006"W   50d0'0.103"N 0.000

    cs2cs +proj=latlong +ellps=clrk66 +nadgrids=conus,null \
        +to +proj=latlong +ellps=GRS80 +datum=NAD83 << EOF
    -111 44
    -111 55
    EOF
    111d0'2.788"W   43d59'59.725"N 0.000
    111dW   55dN 0.000

Downloading and Installing Grids
................................................................................

The source distribution of PROJ.4 contains only the ntv1_can.dat file.  To get
the set of US grid shift files it is necessary to download an additional
distribution of files from the PROJ.4 site, such as
ftp://ftp.remotesensing.org/pub/proj/proj-nad27-1.1.tar.gz.  Overlay it on the
PROJ.4 source distribution, and re-configure, compile and install.  The
distributed ASCII .lla files are converted into binary (platform specific)
files that are installed.  On windows using the nmake /f makefile.vc nadshift
command in the proj\src directory to build and install these files.

It appears we can't redistribute the Canadian NTv2 grid shift file freely,
though it is better than the NTv1 file.  However, end users can download it for
free from the `NRCan web site
<http://www.geod.nrcan.gc.ca/tools-outils/ntv2_e.php>`__.  After downloading
it, just dump it in the data directory with the other installed data files
(usually `/usr/local/share/proj`). See [[NonFreeGrids]] for details.

Caveats
................................................................................

* Where grids overlap (such as conus and ntv1_can.dat for instance) the first
  found for a point will be used regardless of whether it is appropriate or
  not.  So, for instance, ```+nadgrids=ntv1_can.dat```,conus would result in
  the Canadian data being used for some areas in the northern United States
  even though the conus data is the approved data to use for the area.
  Careful selection of files and file order is necessary.  In some cases
  border spanning datasets may need to be pre-segmented into Canadian and
  American points so they can be properly grid shifted
* There are additional grids for shifting between NAD83 and various HPGN
  versions of the NAD83 datum.  Use of these haven't been tried recently so
  you may encounter problems.  The FL.lla, WO.lla, MD.lla, TN.lla and WI.lla
  are examples of high precision grid shifts.  Take care!
* Additional detail on the grid shift being applied can be found by setting
  the PROJ_DEBUG environment variable to a value.  This will result in output
  to stderr on what grid is used to shift points, the bounds of the various
  grids loaded and so forth
* PROJ.4 always assumes that grids contain a shift **to**  NAD83 (essentially
  WGS84).  Other types of grids might or might not be usable

Axis orientation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Starting in PROJ 4.8.0, the +axis argument can be used to control the axis
orientation of the coordinate system.  The default orientation is "easting,
northing, up" but directions can be flipped, or axes flipped using combinations
of the axes in the +axis switch.  The values are:

* "e" - Easting
* "w" - Westing
* "n" - Northing
* "s" - Southing
* "u" - Up
* "d" - Down

They can be combined in +axis in forms like:

* ``+axis=enu`` - the default easting, northing, elevation.
* ``+axis=neu`` - northing, easting, up - useful for "lat/long" geographic
  coordinates, or south orientated transverse mercator.
* ``+axis=wnu`` - westing, northing, up - some planetary coordinate systems
  have "west positive" coordinate systems

Note that the ``+axis`` argument only applies to coordinate transformations done
through ``pj_transform()`` (so it works with ``cs2cs``, but not with the proj
commandline program).
