.\" release 5
.\"
.ad b
.hy 1
.TH CCT 1 "2018/02/25 Rel. 5.0.0"
.SH NAME
cct \- 4D equivalent to the "proj" projection program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cct
[\-options]... [+operator_specs]... infile...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I cct
is a 4D equivalent to the proj(1) projection program.
.PP
cct is an acronym meaning "Coordinate Conversion and Transformation".
.PP
The acronym refers to definitions given in the OGC 08-015r2/ISO-19111
standard "Geographical Information -- Spatial Referencing by Coordinates",
which defines two different classes of coordinate operations:
.PP
*Coordinate Conversions*, which are coordinate operations where input
and output datum are identical (e.g. conversion from geographical to
cartesian coordinates) and
.PP
*Coordinate Transformations*, which are coordinate operations where
input and output datums differ (e.g. change of reference frame).
.PP
\fBcct\fR, however, also refers to Carl Christian Tscherning (1942--2014),
professor of Geodesy at the University of Copenhagen, mentor and advisor
for a generation of Danish geodesists, colleague and collaborator for
two generations of global geodesists, Secretary General for the
International Association of Geodesy, IAG (1995--2007), fellow of the
American Geophysical Union (1991), recipient of the IAG Levallois Medal
(2007), the European Geosciences Union Vening Meinesz Medal (2008), and
of numerous other honours.
.PP
cct, or Christian, as he was known to most of us, was recognized for his
good mood, his sharp wit, his tireless work, and his great commitment to
the development of geodesy - both through his scientific contributions,
comprising more than 250 publications, and by his mentoring and teaching
of the next generations of geodesists.
.PP
As Christian was an avid Fortran programmer, and a keen Unix connoisseur,
he would have enjoyed to know that his initials would be used to name a
modest Unix style transformation filter, hinting at the tireless aspect
of his personality, which was certainly one of the reasons he accomplished
so much, and meant so much to so many people.
.PP
Hence, in honour of cct (the geodesist) this is cct (the program).
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\fB\-o /path/to/file\fR\fR" 1c
Specify output file name\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-c x,y,z,t\fR\fR" 1c
Specify input columns for (up to) 4 input parameters.
Defaults to 1,2,3,4\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-z value\fR\fR" 1c
Provide a fixed z value for all input data (e.g. \-z 0)\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-t value\fR\fR" 1c
Provide a fixed t value for all input data (e.g. \-t 0)\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-I\fR\fR" 1c
Do the inverse transformation\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-v\fR\fR" 1c
Verbose: Provide non-essential informational output.
Repeat \-v for more verbosity (e.g. \-vv)\&
.SH LONG OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-output\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for \-o\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-columns\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for \-c\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-height\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for \-z\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-time\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for \-t\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-verbose\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for \-v\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-inverse\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for \-I\&
.IP "\fB\fB\-\-help\fR\fR" 1c
Alias for -h\&
.SH OPERATOR SPECS
The operator specs describe the action to be performed by cct, e.g:
.IP
+proj=utm  +ellps=GRS80  +zone=32
.PP
instructs cct to convert input data to Universal Transverse Mercator, zone 32
coordinates, based on the GRS80 ellipsoid.
.PP
Hence, the command
.IP
echo 12 55 | cct -z0 -t0 +proj=utm +zone=32 +ellps=GRS80
.PP
Should give results comparable to the classic proj command
.IP
echo 12 55 | proj +proj=utm +zone=32 +ellps=GRS80
.SH EXAMPLES
1. convert geographical input to UTM zone 32 on the GRS80 ellipsoid:
.IP
cct +proj=utm +ellps=GRS80 +zone=32
.PP
2. roundtrip accuracy check for the case above:
.IP
cct +proj=pipeline +proj=utm +ellps=GRS80 +zone=32 +step +step +inv
.PP
3. as (1) but specify input columns for longitude, latitude, height and time:
.IP
cct -c 5,2,1,4  +proj=utm +ellps=GRS80 +zone=32
.PP
4. as (1) but specify fixed height and time, hence needing only 2 cols in input:
.IP
cct -t 0 -z 0  +proj=utm  +ellps=GRS80  +zone=32
.SH HOME PAGE
http://proj4.org/
